docs: final draft notification pattern (#676)
carbon-design-system/carbon-website: src/pages/patterns/notification-pattern/index.mdx

</PageDescription>

<AnchorLinks>

<AnchorLink>Overview</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Designing with notifications</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Notification status</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Notification types</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Considerations when designing</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Accessibility</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Related components and patterns</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>References</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Feedback</AnchorLink>
</AnchorLinks>

## Overview

It’s important to keep users informed and send notifications when there is an update or status change they should be aware of. Users should always be given appropriate and timely messages to help them understand whether they are moving towards their goal. Ensure your notifications are relevant, timely, and informative.

| Key principle | Definition                                                                                              |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Relevant      | Notifications should be related to the user's goals and presented in the context of what they are doing |

> | Timely        | Users should be kept up-to-date with prompt notifications and ensure they see critical immediately      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Timely        | Ensure users are kept up to date with prompt notifications and see critical notifications immediately      |
```

> | Informative   | Provide users with the context and next-steps needed to understand and address the notification         |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Informative   | Provide users with the context and next steps needed to understand and address the notification         |
```

Be considerate of your users when sending a notification. Notifications that are too frequent or disruptive create negative experiences and drive users from platforms.

Notifications are comprised of status and type. Their status signifies the purpose of the information being conveyed. Notification types allow you to tailor the disruptiveness of the notification to the specific situation. Notification status and type options in Carbon should be combined to create notifications that are relevant, timely, and informative for each use case.

<Row>

> <Column colSm={2} colMd={2} colLg={3}>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Column colSm={2} colMd={2} colLg={4}>
```

The text in the titles is wrapping at the large breakpoint (looks fine on mobile/tablet) so might work better as a 4 column. Not a huge deal either way though.

#### Notification status

- Informational <br/>
- Success <br/>
- Warning <br/>
- Error <br/>

> 

Reviewer 2: you can remove br tags

Author: Fixed!

</Column>

> <Column colSm={2} colMd={2} colLg={3}>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Column colSm={2} colMd={2} colLg={4}>
```
switch here too if you switch above

## Notification status

Notification status helps convey the information being communicated. These statuses correspond with a color and icon to provide a consistent, universal experience for users.

![Example of notification status](/images/Status_1120.png)

| Status        | Usage                                                                                                                        | Action                                                                                                    | Color  | Icon               |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------ | ------------------ |

> | Informational | Provide additional information to users that may not be tied to their current action or task                                 | Do not require immediate action and can be dismiss on a timer or persist, depending on the content        | Blue   | No icon            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Informational | Provide additional information to users that may not be tied to their current action or task                                 | Do not require immediate action and can be dismissed on a timer or persist, depending on the content        | Blue   | No icon            |
```

> | Success       | Confirm a task was completed as expected                                                                                     | Typically do not require further action and can dismiss automatically or persist in a nonintrusive manner | Green  | `checkmark filled` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Success       | Confirm a task was completed as expected                                                                                     | Typically do not require further action and can be dismissed automatically or persist in a nonintrusive manner | Green  | `checkmark filled` |
```

| Inline             | Provide users with nondisruptive feedback or the status of an action                                              | Persist until the message is resolved or dismissed by user and may include a ghost button action                                                |
| Toast              | Short, time-based messages that slide in and out of a page and provide nondisruptive information                  | Disappear automatically or can be dismissed by user                                                                                             |
| Banner             | System or product level notifications that are not specific to a task                                             | Persist until dismissed by user and may include a ghost button or link                                                                          |
| Notification panel | Notification center that provides users with system-generated messages                                            | Opened and closed by user                                                                                                                       |

> | Modal              | Highly disruptive notifications that provide users with critical information that needs their attention or action | Persist and block tasks until dismissed by user. Modals allow more user action than other notifications and can include other Carbon components |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Modal              | Highly disruptive notifications that provide users with critical information that needs their attention or action | Persist and block tasks until dismissed by user. Modals allow more user action than other notifications and can include other Carbon components. |
```

### Inline notification

> [Inline notifications](https://www.carbondesignsystem.com/components/notification/usage/) are noninvasive and confined to a specific area in the UI. Inline notifications display both task-generated and system-generated messages and persist until they are dismissed by the user or the notification is resolved. They are frequently used in conjunction with field-level messages for errors in forms or other input areas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Inline notifications](https://www.carbondesignsystem.com/components/notification/usage/) are nondisruptive and confined to a specific area in the UI. Inline notifications display both task-generated and system-generated messages and persist until they are dismissed by the user or the notification is resolved. They are frequently used in conjunction with field-level messages for errors in forms or other input areas.
```

Notification panels are a great solution to ensure that users can access and read all notifications without cluttering the screen with many persistent notifications. In addition to being useful, notification centers address some accessibility considerations with screen readers.

The [right panel](https://www.carbondesignsystem.com/components/UI-shell-right-panel/usage) in the Carbon UI shell supports a notification center. Carbon does not currently have a notification panel component, but if your team has developed one it can be contributed and made available to others.

#### Best practices:

- Give users the ability to manage notification preferences.
- Don't send the same notification multiple times if users don't interact with it.
- List notifications in chronological order.
- Notifications can be grouped by source or urgency.

<Row>
<Column colLg={8}>

![Notification panel in a product](/images/Panel_1120.png)

</Column>
</Row>

### Modal

> Modals interrupt the user and pause their current task. They are highly disruptive to users and should be used sparingly. Only use a modal when the message is critical and needs the user's immediate attention or action. Modals persist until users engage with them and only disappear when dismiss by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modals interrupt the user and pause their current task. They are highly disruptive to users and should be used sparingly. Only use a modal when the message is critical and needs the user's immediate attention or action. Modals persist until users engage with them and only disappear when dismissed by the user.
```

#### Best practices:

- Only display one modal notification at a time.

> - Use modals with messages that need to immediately interrupt a user's task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use modals when you need to immediately interrupt a user's task.
```

**It should be easy to navigate to the notification using only a keyboard.** Using `TAB` moves the screen focus to the notification and pressing `SPACE` or `ENTER` dismiss the notification.

**Don't use notifications that dismiss on a timer for critical or emergency messages.** Some users with disabilities need more time to read or interact with messages and timed toasts may not provide sufficient time.
[WCAG 2.1 success criterion 2.2.4 (AAA)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/no-timing.html)

**Users should be able to manage or limit noncritical notifications.** This gives users the control to reduce the number of distractions or disruptions they receive, which is particularly helpful for users with cognitive limitations.
[WCAG 2.1 success criterion 2.2.3 (AAA)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/interruptions.html)

## Related components and patterns

<Row>

> <Column colSm={2} colMd={2} colLg={2}>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Column colSm={2} colMd={2} colLg={4}>
```

UI shell is wrapping and looks odd

#### Components

- [Notification](/components/notification/usage) <br/>
- [Modal](/components/modal/usage) <br/>
- [UI shell](/components/UI-shell-right-panel/usage) <br/>

> 

Reviewer 2: You shouldn't need the break tags here
```
- [Notification](/components/notification/usage) 
- [Modal](/components/modal/usage)
- [UI shell](/components/UI-shell-right-panel/usage) 
```

Author: Fixed!

</Column>

> <Column colSm={2} colMd={2} colLg={3}>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Column colSm={2} colMd={2} colLg={4}>
```

#### Patterns

- Forms <br/>
- Dialogs <br/>

> - Error states (future) <br/>

Reviewer 2: Same here, you can remove br tags

Author: Fixed!
